Soft after an early summer of rain and with barely a breath of wind to play tricks on shots, minds and yardage books, the course was ripe for the picking in Thursday’s first round of the British Open.

But those who ended up with the lowest scores did not shake the tree with abandon. Instead, men like Zach Johnson proceeded with methodical, surgical care.

However benign the conditions, there were still those 206 bunkers.

“I was really trying to avoid them; I played pretty conservative off the tee,” Johnson said after his five-under-par round of 65 left him one shot off Adam Scott’s lead. “I think if you get it inside a pot bunker greenside, you can get it up and down. You get it in a pot bunker fairway side, you are going to have a really, really difficult time making pars. So I think the tee shot in this Open championship is as important as any tournament I’ve ever seen.”

If Johnson needed reassurance that his bunker mentality was the right mentality, he needed only observe the misadventures of one of his playing partners, Darren Clarke. A year ago, Clarke — the sentimental favorite from Northern Ireland — finally won the British Open at age 42.

He treasured the moment, treasured the claret jug and the autumnal sense of fulfillment. But this is another year, another stretch of English coastline and another soundtrack. Instead of hearing the roars of Royal St. George’s, the big, ruddy-faced Clarke played to sympathetic silence or collective groans.

One of the low points came at the 11th when Clarke hit into a fairway bunker and then mis-hit his next shot out of the sand into another bunker on the opposite side of the fairway.

Despite its compact layout, Lytham has more bunkers — by far — than any of the other eight courses on the Open rotation: enough to cause confusion over the official count, which the club professional Eddie Birchenough insists is 206.

“I think the nearest to that is Muirfield with about 150, so that is really the defining characteristic of the course,” Birchenough said in his modest office filled with packages and a still-wrapped portrait of Seve Ballesteros, a two-time winner at Lytham who died last year.

Ballesteros’s two Open victories here remain a testimony to the ability of a gifted scrambler to find a way. But improvising out of trap after trap is hardly the recommended approach to Lytham.

Consider Phil Mickelson, the American star who found himself in a fairway bunker on No. 8 and managed to blast out, only to see his ball plop into a thicket of rough just beyond the bunker’s lip. After searching feverishly, his hands disappearing in the thick grass, Mickelson finally determined that he had an unplayable lie and took a penalty drop.

Consider (again) Clarke, who found a fairway bunker on No. 14 and did not even try to advance the ball, blasting out sideways while looking grim and then leaning on his club although he probably would have preferred to snap it over his knee.

“The bunkers all essentially have a red line around them,” said Tony Jacklin, who won the 1969 Open at Lytham. “I mean, they’re a one-shot penalty. Getting the ball off the tee in play is paramount.”

With all the bunkers about, there is certainly variety. There are the pot bunkers: the deep traps shaped like sunken pots. There are the shallower or less uniform varieties that seemed nickname-ready: a boomerang-shaped bunker on 17, and one in the shape of a bear’s paw print on 13 with thick grass growing on the lip that actually obscures much of the front wall.

A would-be Open champion would definitely not want to land in there.

What the bunkers share is coarse sand that bears little resemblance to the fine Caribbean-style white sand you might find on the PGA Tour. Lytham’s sand could never be raked smooth. Its bunkers also share the classic British Open face: layers of stacked sod that appear rather like a bonsai version of a terraced paddy field.

That seems an appropriate metaphor considering that conditions have been soggy enough to grow rice here this week. Some of the fairway bunkers on 16 even featured standing water. That was good news for John Daly, the former Open champion who has long projected more power than accuracy. He was able to seek relief and a free drop after splashing down during his round of 72.

Others had to live with the consequences. And the question is why Lytham St. Annes, a seemingly peaceful place, chooses to inflict such angst on those who choose to play on a course with 206 bunkers throughout the year.

“I think what happened is that originally if you see pictures of when Bobby Jones played here, there was lots of sandy scrub,” said Birchenough, referring to Jones’s victory in 1926. “I think you’d call it waste areas in America.”

Those areas, according to Birchenough, made it difficult to know where players could and could not ground their club.

“That’s because they were so ill defined,” he said. “And it brought a lot of doubt or questions into lies: where a ball is lying and how to play it. And I think by defining the bunkers more clearly, they’ve taken that element out of it. But of course the bunkers were always in dips. Traditionally, that was just where the sheep lay at the bottom of the dune, wasn’t it? So all our bunkers are into lowland.”

No matter how rich the history, there are days when the regulars simply decline the honor of a round full of dangers.

“Sometimes in the early spring,” Birchenough said, “when the rough is up and the wind is blowing, the members will say, ‘I’ll just let this one go and play next week.’ ”

Those playing in the Open do not have that option. Best that they stick to the straight and narrow and hope the wind does not start howling.
